# Simple Types

There are three main *primitive* or *simple* types in both JS and TS.
- **`boolean`** - True or False
- **`number`**  - Whole numbers and float values
- **`string`** - Values written inside of quotes ' " `

## Type Assignment

### Explicit Types

- This is when you **explicitly** write out the type:

```
const explicit: string = "cheese";
```

### Implicit Types

- TypeScript will "guess" or "infer" the type, based on the assigned value:

```
const implicit = "cheese";
// This is a string! -TS
```

**Explicit** type assignments are easier to read and more intentional.  
**Implicit** type assignments are shorter, faster to type, and often used when developing and/or testing.

## Error in Type Assignment

TypeScript will throw an error if the data types don't match:

```
let explicit: string = "cheese";  // string type
explicit = 123;                   // tries to reassign string to a number
```

**Implicit** type assignment will also throw an error:

```
let implicit = "cheese";   // inferred as string type
implicit = 321;            // tries to reassign string to a number
```

## Unable to Infer

Sometimes, TypeScript can't always properly guess what the type of a variable is. In those cases, TypeScript will set the type to `any`, which disables type checking.

We can disable this behavior by enabling `noImplicitAny` as an option inside of the aforementioned `tsconfig.json` file.

---

# Special Types

## Type: any

`any` is a type that disables type checking and lets all types be used.

```
let ur: any = "cute";
ur = true;              // reassigns with no error because it's "any" type
```

> `any` should try to be avoided at ***any*** cost :^)

## Type: unknown

`unknown` is a similar, but safer alternative to `any`.  
TypeScript will prevent `unknown` types from being used:

[Example](https://www.w3schools.com/typescript/trytypescript.php?filename=demo_special_types_with_unknown)

> `unknown` is best used when you don't know the type of the data. To add a type later, you'll need to *cast* it.

**Casting** is when we use the `as` keyword to say if a property or variable is of the casted type.

## Type: never

`never` throws an error whenever it's defined:

```
const peter: never = "lands";
// Error: Type "string" is not assignable to type "never"
```

> `never` is rarely used (especially by itself). Its primary use is in advanced generics.

## Type: undefined & null

`undefined` and `null` are types that refer to the JS primitive types.

```
const uh: undefined = undefined;
const no: null = null;
```

> These types don't have much use inside of TypeScript unless `strictNullChecks` as an option is enabled inside of the `tsconfig.json` file.