# Functions

> TypeScript has a specific syntax for typing both function parameters AND return values.

## Return Types

- The type of a function's return value can be *`explicitly`* defined.

> function functionName(parameter): `expectedReturnType` { <-- Define **return type** here
>
> };

```
function getTime(): number {        // Expects return value to be number type
   return new Date().getTime();
};
```

If a `return type` is NOT defined, TypeScript will try to *infer* the `return type` through the types of the variables or expressions returned.

## Void Return Type

The **`void`** type can be used to indicate a function that doesn't return any value.

```
function returnNothing(): void {
   console.log("Return nothing at all!");
};
```

## Parameters

Function parameters are typed just like previously discussed variable declarations:

```
function maffs(a: number, b: number) {
   return a + b;
};
```

> If no parameter types are defined, TypeScript will default to using the `any` type.
> **EXCEPT** when there's additional type information from any `default parameters` or any related `type aliases`.

## Optional Parameters

TypeScript will assume all parameters are required by default. But just like object properties, function parameters can be marked as optional.

> function questionMark(param1: string, param2?: number) {    <-- Add a `?` after the optional parameter
>  
> };

```
function optionalMaffs(a: number, b: number, c?: number) {
   return a + b + (c || 0);
};
```

## Default Parameters

When creating default values for parameters, the default value goes *after* setting the type:

> function defaultParams(default: string `= "defaultValue"`) { <-- Define **default value** here
> 
> };

```
function divideyWidey(initial: number, amount: number = 1) {
   return initial / amount;
};
```

- TypeScript can also *infer* the type from the preset default value.

## Named Parameters

Generally, we want to name our parameters to be informative and intentional.  

For whatever reason, if we can't semantically name our function parameters, then we can use `named parameters`.  

`Named parameters` follow the same typing syntax as normal parameters.  

When using `named parameters`, our function takes in an `object` with the `named parameters` inside of that object, with the typings set after.

Because we're using this object as the overall parameter, our function is only expecting **`ONE INPUT`**.

> function functionName(`{paramName}`: `{paramName: type}`) {
> 
> };  
> // To invoke any function with named parameters, pass in arguments through an `object`, with the arguments matching both the named parameters and their types.

```
function fullName ({first, last} : {first: string, last: string}) {
   return first + " " + last;
};

// To invoke the fullName function (or any function with named parameters), we pass in arguments through an object, like this:

fullName({first: "Jimmy", last: "Neutron"});    // Returns "Jimmy Neutron"
```

Just like functions without `named parameters`, we can explicitly define the **`return types`** of functions with `named parameters`:

```
function numToString({num1, num2}: {num1: number, num2: number}): string {
   return (num1 + num2).toString();
};
// would run an error IF the explicitly defined function return type wasn't string type
```

## Rest Parameters

**`Rest parameters`** can be added like normal parameters BUT their types are always `arrays` (since rest parameters are always arrays).

> function functionName(`...restParam: restType[]`) {
> 
> };

```
function pushMe(...rest: number[], value: number) {
   return rest.push(value);
};
```

## Function Type Aliases

Function types can be defined outside of function with **`type aliases`**.  

These types are written similarly to *`arrow functions`*.

> `type` AliasName = (`parameterName`: `type`) => `functionReturnType`;  

```
type Negate = (value: number) => number;

const negateFunction: Negate = (value) => value * -1;
```

> In the above example, we create a `Negate` type alias, that takes a parameter called `value` (with a `number` type) and returns a `number` type.  
> Then we create the `negateFunction` function, where the "`value`" parameter automatically get assigned the `number` type from the previously created `Negate` type.